Through habits we become our machines.
We stream, update, capture, upload, share, grind, link,
We verify, map, save, trash and troll.
Repetition breeds expertise, even as it breeds boredom.
Habituation and the new are the dreams and nightmares of new media companies.
they are constantly asking/needing to be refreshed.
They are new to the extent that they are updated.
New media live and die by the update.
Things and people not updating are things and people lost or in distress, for we too have become creatures of the update.
To be is to be updated: to update and to be subjected to the update.
To put it in a formula: habit + crisis = update.
Habits are creative anticipations based on past repetitions that
make network maps the historical future.
only a crisis—actual or perceived— produces real change.
new media is a function of YOU.
YOU is a particularly shifty shifter
YOU is both singular and plural
YOU addresses individuals as individuals.
Habits are strange contradictory things.
Habits are both inflexible and creative.
my own body is my basic habit.
modern man is a somnambulist who is linked to others through habit.
Habits link not only humans to other humans, but also humans to non- humans and the environment
Habits link people to the environment.
habits are things done by the environment
Habit is the root of reason. Habit allows the mind to transcend experience: to reason about experience
Friends and their actions are clearly used to determine not only our social networks, but also the strength of our ties.
The winning algorithm employed the average rating, factors to compensate for user and movie bias and, most importantly. 
The algorithm created “neighborhoods” based on the relationship  between films and users.
the Internet is a series of gated communities.
This is redlining on an entirely different level and, as I’ve elaborated elsewhere, network analytics engage in discrimination “under cover” of seemingly neutral proxies that target intersections of race, class, gender and sexuality.
These algorithms make no attempt at desegregation, at expanding one’s point of view by exposing people to things that are radically different.
Importantly, these prospective algorithms were tested by hindcasting—they were evaluated on their ability to predict the past. The Netflix challenge offered teams a training set, a probe set to test this training; a quiz set that was unknown but could be queried once a day; and a final test set to determine the prize. 
Determine how effective these systems really are. 
the proof is that there is no proof.
Humans build computers but are folded in return
Spectators perceive the effects of the gaze because their estranged screen representations allow them to momentarily see themselves as objects
mapping invisible to visible 
Internet is a rhizome
Artifacts are Tangible objects that can express their properties digitally