Tension and Materiality in a Textile systemSummary This chapter seeks to introduce potential complementary strands of R&D strategies for a postdigital textile and material system. It draws from the puppetry approach to designing and performing with different materialities. The research analyses how the tensions present in a puppet system provoke uncanny relationships and uses the concepts of "double vision" and "breathed stillness" to have a puppetry perspective on the textile in "Textasis" as defined by Elaine Igoe. It reviews alternative design methodologies developed by material researchers to produce new textile materials.  The chapter proposes to trace a new framework that elicits puppet making as a design method for bringing forth a world of interconnected and ambiguous agencies in a textile system and new forms of nonverbal communication with our environment.Keywords; puppetry, material agency, system, interaction, uncanny, postdigitalIntroductionWe now live in a postdigital era where the digital has overcome its frontier with the analogue and where textile artefacts inherit an ambivalent nature by design. Ambiguous textiles interact with us and other postdigital objects in the New Aesthetic realm12.Textile in "Textasis" is Óin a tension between its material form and how it performs and what it represents beyond the tactileÓ3. The textile and material design discipline explores interdisciplinary strategies4 to navigate the uncertainty of Ňchanging relationship between space and timeÓ5.Using soft system methodologies6; designers investigate new interacting and postdigital materialities. Their process of inquiry is systemic7. They build textile devices to organise their exploration while updating their experiential knowledge8. From inside a continuous learning process, textile designers listen to the voice of their material9 and take cues from Nature10 to assemble and gather11 the different materials into textile artefacts. Their perception and creativity are fuelled by new expressions of networked artefacts, intelligent household appliances12, behavioural objects13, soft robots14, and new becoming material things15. Postdigital textile designers respond to the "liquefaction"16 of their working environment with growing materials17, biocomposites18 and soft machines19. They design their material as lively2021 or hack living organisms to shape Ňour future sustainable materialityÓ and facilitate Ňa transition towards the EcoceneÓ22. They investigate a Ňway of thinking about materials towards more unpredictable, non-linear, and open designÓ23 and explore new methodologies for Ňdesigning with alive, active, adaptive materials Ň24. Woven, stitched or knitted, postdigital materials are still in a ŇbecomingÓ state and Ňcontext-dependentÓ25, untamed by the textile, the matter remains available to start new conversations with the textile wearer. The ambiguous textile expands the bodiesŐ expressivity. In the postdigital, the designers learn to work with the fluidic and opalescent nature of the textile with Ňmaterial forms [which] are conceived in continuous formationÓ26 and to let the material communicate through the textile with the bodies. On the other hand, in puppetry, the relationships and interactions within the puppet system: the puppet, the puppeteer and the audience, elicit liveliness and agency. We, as an audience, grant liveliness to the puppet, as we perceive Ňthe unseen liveness of matterÓ27  in the performing device and observe the puppet interaction not only with its environment but also with us. The puppet character is built at the cognitive level, from the relationships between the human performer and the puppet object28. At the mechanical level, the interactions between the different materials elicit the puppet's behaviour2930. Furthermore, puppetry is firmly rooted in the ambivalent human and in-human nature of the puppet, in the liveliness of its dead matter31 or in other words; in its uncanny character32. We experience the uncanniness of the puppet's duality and of the different ontological status of the puppet and the puppeteer33. Puppet makers tune this uncanniness to fit the story and make us feel a variety of emotions, including empathy but not only as we might perceive the puppet as aloof34.  In this design discipline, uncanniness is a material35. In an age of uncertainty and ongoing liquefaction of our relationships, designing interactions between postdigital devices and with their environment represents a challenge for textile designers. The research takes the position that puppetry can provide an original perspective on the agency of the textile and initiate complementary strand of R&D strategies in textile and material design interaction.1.  The Puppet SystemIt can start like this: the puppet raises a hand, a chin, turn its head and looks at you. Ň[Puppets are] life forms that function in both material and immaterial ways, making humans and objects co-creators with infinite capacities for performance36.Ó In the marionette, the cotton threads link the puppeteer to the puppet, the leather connects the wooden arm to the shoulder. The mechanical tensions between a silk body and an aluminium stick, the tension generated from the difference between the object and its shadows; Ňthe image/object gapÓ37 are all sources of narrative tensions. The performer pulls and releases the tension between the marionette limbs. Is it a dancer sliding or a soldier stumping? In shadow theatre, Ň[t]he light-transmission characteristics of different materials are what give the shadow designer a wide-ranging palette Ň38. Tensions emerge from the difference of materiality in the puppet structure. Manipulating the tensions in the puppet system elicits the interactions within the puppet structure and with its environment and brings up the character of the puppets. The puppet system relies on systems of nonverbal communication Ňthat are generated by its design, its physical transformations, or its interactions with the human and material world.Ó39 Overall, puppetry is an ecosystem:Ó a constant flow of interactions, processes and reactions between organic and inorganic matter, in the interrelationship between live and inanimate beingsÓ40. Puppetry explores the complexity of the world through a systemic process of inquiry41; storytelling. The puppets are Ňintellectual devices Ń whose role is to help structure an exploration of Ň42 the story being performed. In essence, puppetry is a soft system.Puppets, puppeteers and spectators are enmeshed as nodes in a puppet system where we, as an audience, visualise the non-human and human matter Ňinteractions at scales beyond ordinary human perceptionÓ43. Meanwhile, we also perceive the tension between the puppet"s two aspects of ŇobjectÓ and ŇlifeÓ; the puppet "opalescence"44 and its uncanniness45. Fundamentally, the puppet works by different rules of logic to their human manipulators and audiences. The puppet ensemble creates and resolves its ambiguity46, using mainly nonverbal communication channels. Puppets, puppeteers and the audience collaborate to forge a narrative that settles the unsettling/unsettled nature of the puppet momentarily as the puppetsÓ come into existence just for the time of storytellingÓ47. Puppetry is ephemeral and feeds from the endless narrative potential of the interactions with non-human matter.In that context, the purpose of the puppet maker is not to produce a lively object per se but a system of signs associated with the presence of life in reaction to which we Ňdevelop a concept called "double vision" which postulates that an audience sees the puppet [É] as a perceived object and as an imagined life48. More practically, puppet making is to design relationships between puppets and the puppeteers and also between the puppet and their audience. Puppeteers explore in their design, the relationships between the bodies of the puppeteers and their puppet to create characters49. The puppets engage the audience at an emotional level despite their uncanny behaviours. Puppets and puppeteers are Ňjoined withÓ50 the audience and gathered into a narrative. Puppet makers do not have to be even realistic in their design; they only have to be true to the story performed by the puppet. Puppet characters are not necessarily empathetic either; they are expressive and efficient. In essence, the puppet system is a gathering of non-human and human matterÓ[split] from the inside, along the grain of their movement or becoming.Ó51 The difference of materiality elicits tensions between the puppet and the puppeteer Óas they thread their ways through the tangle of relationships in which they are comprehensively enmeshedÓ52. At a phenomenological level, we perceive the material interactions, tensions and transformations in the puppet ensemble. The puppet system resolves the uncanny opalescence of the puppet with the production of a narrative. On stage or in their workshops, puppeteers make the matter puppet-able, they create a character based on the relationships between different materialities. Overall, the puppet system is not dedicated to the puppeteerŐs message, but to the puppetŐs story. In contrast, the textile practitioners produce assemblages of non-human and human matter to expand the expressivity of the textile wearer not of the garment. Starting with a material-led process, textile designers surrender to a user-centred design approach.2. Puppet-able MatterWhen manipulating raw material on stage, puppeteers interact with theÓ fundamental material properties, as well as [acknowledge] the variety of possible interactions between humans and the material worldÓ53. Like textile practitioners, puppet makers are working and learning while making54.Following a "soft logic"55, they look forÓ something that may come from within the materialsÓ56. Textile makers experiment with new combinations of materials and hack traditional tools57, reinterpret objects from their intended use or context and develop their tacit knowledge through reinterpretation and tactile manipulation58. Textile designers, similarly to puppeteers, are driven by aesthetic considerations as they manipulate the abstract functional and mechanical properties of their material5960. With the "Choropleth flag"61, the designer turns the invisibility of LondonŐs pollution into visible colour change and opens the dialogue between the human and the non-human matter. Like a puppet maker, she raises the awareness of the viewer to the material property62, which here is the greenhouse gases harmfulness. As a result, puppet making as a craft practice is not very different from a textile practice. Textile practitioners center their work on the relationship between the textile and the one who manipulates it. By contrast, puppet makers focus on the relationships between the puppet, the manipulator and the audience. In this framework, puppeteers are behind their puppet unless they play their part as a puppet themselves, and we ultimately connect to the puppet, not the manipulators. Whereas, in a textile system, the observer communicates with the wearer"s body, not with his clothes. In the "Choropleth flag", we engage in an imaginary conversation with the toxic human emissions, not with the flag. In contemporary puppet performances, puppeteersŐ bodies are themselves a puppet material63, like sellotape64 or water65, they are lively characters interacting with actor bodies on stage. The stories emerge from the relationships between the human and non-human bodies performed on stage. In textile, when the dress responds to the sunlight heat and changes its colour, the narrative occurs not with the dress, but with the human body who wears it. In essence, in puppetry, surprise and wonder come from the puppet bodies, in textile making they come from the wearerŐs body.  Puppet makers create non-human characters based on their relationships with their manipulator and the audience, while textile designers focus on the expressivity of the human bodies. The puppet has to connect both to the puppeteer and to us, the audience to come to life66. Puppet makers design a control system to allow the puppeteer to manipulate the interactions between the different material inside the puppet body. They focus on how to perform the puppets, and they make the matter "puppet-able"; material one can manipulate, a gathering67 of relationships which expresses a character fit for the story.  How much tension to put between the wooden arm and the silicon hand? Which material to use for the joints? Where to put the articulation points? What will be the character of the interaction between the puppet's body parts?  How will it move? As a result, puppeteers manipulate the tensions Ňpresent-at-hand"68 in the performing device to express its character. They pull or release the strings, raise or lower the stick to free or hold the tensions in the puppetŐs body. Without tension in the puppet system, there will not be any manipulation available, no transformation, no character, no story, puppetry will not happen69.Double vision and Breathed stillnessPuppet makers explore how to tune the unseen liveliness of the matter by making visible or invisible the material properties such as weight, acoustic potential or elasticity70. Puppeteers follow a sequence of movements and "breathed stillness"71 to build the puppet character. When it is still but breathing, the puppet is moving from within its structure. As the puppet is in action, we perceive the puppetŐs Ňmovement as thoughtsÓ72. Furthermore, the concept of "double vision" suggests that the observer of a textile in "Textasis" can see it simultaneously as a textile object embedded with technology and as a lively matter. We acknowledge the duality of the postdigital textile. In response to its manipulation, we relate alternatively to the functionality or the aesthetic of the object. In essence, these two puppetry concepts: double vision and breathed stillness offer a framework for designers to produce a puppet-able textile.In summary, the puppet system focuses on the puppetŐs lively expression and its character when, by contrast, the textile system expands the textile wearer/performer expressivity. Puppetry suggests investing in the ability of an audience to use its capacity of "double vision" to read the ambivalent character of postdigital textiles and in the design of a manipulation system not only to generate movement but also to keep the artefact in a breathed stillness. On stage or in their workshops, puppeteers tune enmeshed tensions between different materialities to create the puppet character. They design a system to control the performing device from within and without, they make the object capable of movement and breathing liveliness; they make the matter puppet-able. Puppetry offers a method based on double vision and breathed stillness for designers to produce a puppet-able textile in Textasis.3. Interactive Agencies and Uncanny relationshipsPuppetry, as a design discipline, produces relationships between non-human and human matter to create characters. Puppet makers, led by the materials in the puppet, design a control system of joints and articulations points to operate the tension between the different materials. They give the puppeteer the possibility to open a dialogue with the puppet materials and produce a meaningful performance73. ŇThe jointing (or lack of it) and the structure of the puppet allow for certain forms of expressiveness and not others. Ň74. Aloof, uncanny, and opalescent, the puppets appear to have agency and engage us at an emotional level. In puppetry, the idea is not to offset their unsettling behaviour. On the contrary, the purpose is to explore their uncanniness, to use it to engage a nonverbal conversation with the spectators and hold them until the material story has unfolded. The puppet system creates and resolves its ambiguity as the opalescent puppet engages in uncanny relationships with its puppeteer and the audience.Postdigital textiles are ŇsmartÓ and responsive with the ability to evolve75. Materials follow their intentions/rules76, improvise and modify their behaviour in response to their environment77. Textiles haveÓ the potential for a digital encounter which may enhance and/or make uncanny the experience altogether Ň78. They oscillate between Ňdigitality and materiality Ň79. Living organisms are growing textile artefacts and with designers, control the textileŐs narrative80. They are lively, active and adaptive81. In effect, postdigital materials have agency. In that context, Elaine Igoe calls textile and material designers to accept the ŇliquefactionÓ of their practice, to use the textile in tension between form and performance. When designing sustainable Ňthings, [which] endure beyond the moment of their emergenceÓ Ingold suggests focusing on the Ňcontrary forces of friction that materials exert on one another Ň82. Textile researchers, such as Dr Amy Winters have already adapted their design process to deal with the continuous flow of new material input. They build soft machines and sensitive interfaces83, create symbiotic relationships with living systems84 and other textile researchers use their soft-logic to invest in different fields such as data visualisation85. With this in mind, we will review two innovative frameworks for designing with non-human agencies in textile and material design: - Pr Caroline Collet who explores the agency of the mycelium and its creativity when in relationships with other materials, and-  Dr Amy Winters, who recreates the agency of natural elements and investigates how embedding microfluidics into the design of a dress can enhance the interactions of human bodies. They address the non-human agency in different ways: in a playful system86 and also as a model or as a "hackable systemÓ87.They both explore how to communicate with non-human materials and to collaborate with them sustainably.Interactive agenciesCollet explores a collaborative framework to design with mycelium for fashion applications and respond to the call Ňto re-imagine ways of growing and embellishing textilesÓ in a sustainable manner88. She proposes a design-led material process based on the collaboration between non-human matter and the designer. The issue is neither the agency nor the liveliness of the mycelium but about how to harvest its creativity. Collet identifies three types of tension in her design process: the "creative tension " of the collaboration between mycelium and designers89, the tension between two possible outcomes of the interaction between mycelium and other materials: mycelium or contamination90 and the tension between living material and its environment including other non-living materials91. In her framework, the designer establishes a system of control to drive the mycelium interactions with other natural materials and manipulate the tensions present in a "meshwork"92 of living organisms, designer, environment and other natural materials. In the performance "Claytime" directed by McDermott (1997) for Improbable Theatre, the puppeteers manipulate clay in front of the audience and like in Collet"s "grow-made" frameworkÓthere is no or little distinction between the storyteller/puppeteer [the mycelium], and the action created [the textile]Ó93. There is another similarity in both processes as in "Claytime"; the clay performer returns into raw material once the story is performed, and so does the mycelium as the designer gets rid of its partner as soon as he finds the outcome of the performance successful. In puppetry, tension has materiality and is embodied in the articulations between the limbs, the space between the different elements of the puppet structure; the joints. The maker selects the location and the materials of the articulation points based on the materials used in the limbs. These parameters control the different agencies in the system, reveal Ňthe full repertoire of self-organising capabilities of matter and energyÓ94. The puppet system tells a story, not the one the puppeteers want, but the ones the system can perform.Uncanny relationshipsUsing the metaphor of the ŇLab as a KitchenÓ Winters defines a material-led process driven by the researcher"sÓtactile and kinaesthetic mindÓ95 and offers a new framework ŇHacking-Bricolage-AlchemyÓ to work with soft robotic technologies. The designer creates multisensory surfaces combining traditional textile processes and programmable materials; the microfluidics. The surfaces appear as lively characters. They offer their liveliness as an extension of the expressivity of the body. A dress, embedded with wearable microfluidics, receives an ambiguous character by design and seems to have agency. The designer manipulates the active and passive nature of the soft material and provides an unsettling behaviour to the body, which turns into a human-machine entity. The body plus dress enters with the other agencies in uncanny relationships.The ambivalent nature of the microfluidics material, the dress and the body differs. The programmed microfluidics provide a set of different characters and interactive possibilities96; they are "man-made" but looking nature-made, their nature is uncertain. When in context, the microfluidics structure activates, and the dress becomes a lively object. The dress without body calls us to engage in a playful relation with it. As the dress adds to its expressivity a body, it enters into a dynamic relationship with its environment. It starts to look at us, and we wonder: is it a human or an alien human? Is it human or from another dimension? Our relationship to the dress plus the body is uncanny.Puppetry encourages to analyse the relationships between the microfluidics, the dress and the wearer and the observers dynamically. It suggests to let the material communication channel opened on the textile so we, as an audience, could interact with the microfluidics through the dress. Designers might want to set the level of uncanniness dynamically and hide or reveal the points of manipulation and control or showing them in plain sight as in a marionette performance. In that context, puppetry can help designers to engage the bodies into improvised and lasting relationships. How do the active and passive properties of the microfluidic matter are revealed or hidden? How to generate narrative tensions in the interaction with the dress? As an observer, we perceive the unsettling quality of the dress plus body ensemble and not sure if we communicate with the one who wears the dress, the dress itself or maybe the both at the same time. Does the body performs the dress or sit alongside the dress? Is the dress the puppet and the body the puppeteer? Who is in control? Who between the dress and the body is in a relationship with us? Who is the storyteller? As a potential wearer of the dress, how do I manipulate the dress? How do I perform the different characters of the microfluidic soft robots? How to interact with other people wearing or not wearing a similar dress? How long will this relationship last?ConclusionIn an age of uncertainty and ongoing liquefaction of our relationships, designing interactions between postdigital artefacts and with their environment represents a challenge for textile designers. In this environment, textile and material practitioners design their own postdigital material. Taking cues from their environment with soft system methodologies; they hack, imitate or mimic the natural elements. They design uncanny relationships between human bodies and fluidic material and explore the potential to have another form of communication with our environment; more respectful, more sustainable, softer.The paper discusses the puppetry approach to performing and designing with different materialities and how to contribute to the visibility of unseen matter at work in a textile in "Textasis". Introducing the puppet system, the paper analyses how the tensions present in the system at the cognitive and mechanical levels provoke uncanny relationships between different agencies. Puppeteers use their tactile and tacit knowledge on their material to build characters in motion and the relationships between the performer and the material on stage. They design control systems to manipulate the tension between the different puppet materials, the interactive agencies and the uncanny relationships in the puppet system. The puppets appear to have agency and despite their uncanniness, engage us at an emotional level.The review of alternative design methodologies to improve the connections with our environment sustainably indicates a potential for puppet makers to contribute to the R&D strategies in the postdigital age. Puppetry encourages to analyse the relationships with new technological materials dynamically; between the material, the textile, the body and the external observer. It proposes to reveal or hide the material liveliness at play on the human body and to let the material communication channel opened on the textile. It suggests to apprehend the textile agency and the control system as materials and to design a system to manipulate the tensions between the different materialities. In that context, puppetry can help designers to engage the bodies and their natural environment into improvised, sustainable and lasting relationships. In essence, the paper offers to textile and material designers to use the puppet channel in their communication with postdigital materials. Finally, puppetry invites designers to expand their practice with the incorporation of puppet making as a complementary design method for bringing forth a world of meshed and ambiguous and interactive agencies in a textile system.1David M. Berry, Critical Theory and the Digital, Critical Theory and Contemporary Society (NY: Bloomsburry, 2014).2 Lukasz Mirocha, ŇCommunication Models, Aesthetics and Ontology of the Computational Age Revealed,Ó in Postdigital Aesthetics; Art, Computation and Design., ed. David M. Berry and Michael Dieter (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan., 2015), 58Đ71.3  E. Igoe, ŇIN TEXTASIS: MATRIXIAL NARRATIVES OF TEXTILE DESIGNÓ (Thesis, Royal College of Art, 2013)4  Louise Valentine et al., ŇDesign Thinking for Textiles: LetŐs Make It Meaningful,Ó The Design Journal 20, no. sup1 (July 28, 2017): S964Đ76, accessed Aug 13, 2020,  https://doi.org/10.1080/14606925.2017.1353041.5 Zygmunt Bauman, Liquid Modernity (Polity, 2000).6 Peter Checkland, ŇSoft Systems Methodology: A Thirty Year Retrospective,Ó Systems Research and Behavioral Science 17, no. S1 (2000): S11Đ58, accessed 26, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-1743(200011)17:1+%3C::AID-SRES374%3E3.0.CO;2-O 7 Checkland, ŇSoft Systems MethodologyÓ, S17.8 Elvin Karana et al., ŇMaterial Driven Design (MDD): A Method to Design for Material Experiences,Ó International Journal of Design Vol. 9 No. 2 (2015): 35Đ54.9 Nithikul Nimkulrat, ŇVoice of Material in Transforming Meaning of Artefacts,Ó Proceedings of the Design Research Society Conference (DRS 2012 Bangkok), 2012m, accessed August 10, 2020, https://www.academia.edu/3070125/Voice_of_material_in_transforming_meaning_of_artefacts. 10 Carole Collet, ŇGrow-Made" Textiles,Ó in International Conference 2017 of the Design Research Society Special Interest Group on Experiential Knowledge (EKSIG), ed. Elvin Karana et al., accessed August 19, 2020, https://www.eksig.org/EKSIG2017.html.11 Tim Ingold, ŇIn the Gathering Shadows of Material Things,Ó in Exploring Materiality and Connectivity in Anthropology and Beyond, ed. Philipp Schorch, Martin Saxer, and Marlen Elders (UCL Press, 2020), 17Đ3512 Dan Lockton and Delfina Fantini van Ditmar, ŇTaking the Code for a Walk,Ó Interactions 23, 1, no. (January + February 2016), accessed June 27, 2020, doi:10.1145/2855958.13 Florian Levillain and Elisabetta Zibetti, ŇBehavioral Objects: The Rise of the Evocative Machines,Ó Journal of Human-Robot Interaction Vol. 6, No. 1, 2017: Pages 4Đ24, accessed June 8, 2019, doi:10.5898/JHRI.6.1.14 D. P. Holland et al., ŇThe Soft Robotics Toolkit: Strategies for Overcoming Obstacles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic Hardware,Ó IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine 24, no. 1 (March 2017): 57Đ64, doi:10.1109/MRA.2016.2639067.15 Anna VallgŚrda, ŇGiving Form to Computational Things: Developing a Practice of Interaction Design,Ó Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 18 (March 1, 2014), doi:10.1007/s00779-013-0685-8.16 Elaine Igoe, ŇChange Matters: Theories of Postdigital Textiles and Material Design,Ó in Proceedings of DRS 2018 International Conference: Catalyst (Design Research Society 2018: Catalyst, Design Research Society, 2018), 1787Đ99, https://researchportal.port.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/change-matters-theories-of-postdigital-textiles-and-material-design(713b1d9e-52be-4c27-a371-8d638b01d249).html?utm_source=CPB&utm_medium=cms&utm_campaign=JPB13143.17Serena Camere and Elvin Karana, ŇGrowing Materials for Product Design,Ó in Proceedings of International Conference on Experiential Knowledge (EKSIG2017, Delft, the Netherlands., 2017).18 Clara Davis, ŇBiofashion,Ó CLARA DAVIS = designerd + material activist + chemartist + bioneer, accessed August 21, 2020, https://clara-davis.com/sets/biofashion/.19 Amy Winters, ŇBuilding a Soft Machine: New Modes of Expressive Surfaces,Ó in Design, User Experience, and Usability: Technological Contexts, ed. Aaron Marcus (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016), 401Đ13.20 Amy Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive Interface,Ó in Crafting Anatomies Archives, Dialogues, Fabrications, ed. Katherine Townsend, Rhian Solomon, and Amanda Briggs-Goode, Bloomsbury Visual Arts (Bloomsbury, 2020), 209Đ32.21 Anna Neklesa, ŇLiving Cotton,Ó 2017,accessed Aug 18, 2020,http://www.annaneklesa.com/.22 Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ Textiles.Ó23 Elvin Karana et al., ŇAlive. Active. Adaptive: Experiential Knowledge and Emerging Materials,Ó International Journal of Design 13, no. 2 (August 1, 2019): 1Đ5, http://www.ijdesign.org/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/3731/858.24  Elvin Karana et al., ŇAlive. Active. AdaptiveÓ25 Jenny Bergstrom et al., ŇBecoming Materials: Material Forms and Forms of Practice,Ó Digital Creativity 21 (September 1, 2010): 155Đ72, https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2010.502235.26 Bergstrom et al., ŇBecoming Materials.Ó27 Eleanor Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and Compost,Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 322Đ35.28 Rene Baker, ŇThe Puppet as a TeacherĘ of Acting,Ó in Theatre Materials: What Is Theatre Made Of?, ed. Eleanor Margolies (Centre for Excellence in Training for Theatre, 2009), 51Đ53, https://renebaker.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/the-puppet-as-teacher-of-acting.pdf.29 Tina Bic‰t, Puppets and Performing Objects: A Practical Guide (Ramsbury: Crowood, 2007).30 Basil Jones, ŇPuppetry, Authorship, and the UR-Narrative,Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 61Đ68.31Steve Tillis, Toward an Aesthetics of the Puppet: Puppetry as a Theatrical Art, Contributions in Drama and Theatre Studies, no. 47 (New York: Greenwood Press, 1992)32 Kenneth Gross, Puppet: An Essay on Uncanny Life (Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press, 2012).33 Paul Piris, ŇThe Co-Presence and the Ontological Ambiguity of the Puppet,Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, 1. Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 41.34 BBC Archive, Ň1977: In The Making: John Wright, Puppeteer,Ó accessed August 19, 2020, https://www.facebook.com/BBCArchive/videos/1977-in-the-making-john-wright-puppeteer/2254571118140513/.35 John Bell, ŇPlaying with the Eternal Uncanny,Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 51.36 Benjamin Gillespie, ŇQue(e)Ring Theatrical Objects,Ó in Performing Objects and Theatrical Things, ed. Marlis Schweitzer and Joanne Zerdy (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire?; New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), 14937 Stephen Kaplin, ŇThe Eye of Light The Tension of Image and Object in Shadow Theatre and Beyond,Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, 1. Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 92.38Kaplin, ŇThe Eye of Light The Tension of Image and Object in Shadow Theatre and Beyond,Ó, 94.39 Dassia N. Posner, ŇContemporary Investigations and Hybridizations (Introduction),Ó in The Routledge Companion to Puppetry and Material Performance, ed. Dassia N. Posner, Claudia Orenstein, and John Bell, 1. Auflage (London New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2014), 226.40 Cariad Astles, ŇAlternative Puppet "Bodies,"Ó M—in-M—in - Revista de Estudos Sobre Teatro de Formas Animadas 1, no. 05 (2008): 64, https://doi.org/10.5965/2595034701052008062.41 Checkland, ŇSoft Systems MethodologyÓ, S17.42 Checkland, ŇSoft Systems MethodologyÓ, S26.43 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,32544 Henryk Jurkowski and Penny Francis,  Aspects of Puppet Theatre (Macmillan Education UK, 2014), 78.45 Kenneth Gross, Puppet: An Essay on Uncanny Life (Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press, 2012).46 Jurkowski and Francis, Aspects of Puppet Theatre,4847 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,32848 Tillis, Toward an Aesthetics of the Puppet,749 Astles, ŇAlternative Puppet "Bodies."Ó, 6650 Ingold, ŇIn the Gathering Shadows of Material Things.Ó,1851 Ingold, ŇIn the Gathering Shadows of Material Things.Ó,2652 Tim Ingold,  Being Alive: Essays on Movement, Knowledge and Description (London?; New York: Routledge, 2011), 141.53 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,32354 Checkland, ŇSoft Systems MethodologyÓ,S17.55 Igoe, ŇIN TEXTASISÓ,39-4656 Manuel. DeLanda, ŇMaterial Complexity,Ó in Digital Tectonics, ed. Chris Williams, David Turnbull, and Neil Leach (Chichester, Eng: Wiley-Academy, 2004), 21, http://images.lib.monash.edu.au/aht2801/04213451.pdf.57 Sarah Taylor and Sara Robertson, ŇDigital Lace: A Collision of Responsive Technologies,Ó in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers Adjunct Program - ISWC "14 Adjunct (the 2014 ACM International Symposium, Seattle, Washington: ACM Press, 2014), 93Đ97, https://doi.org/10.1145/2641248.2641280.58 Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive InterfaceÓ,21659 Bic‰t, Puppets and Performing Objects.60 Nimkulrat, ŇVoice of Material in Transforming Meaning of ArtefactsÓ61 Lauren Bowker, ŇT H E U N S E E N Choropleth,Ó Somerset House, February 1, 2018, https://www.somersethouse.org.uk/whats-on/theunseen-choropleth.62 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,32563 Astles, ŇAlternative Puppet "Bodies."Ó,66.64 Phelim McDermott, Ň70 Hill Lane,Ó Improbable, 1997, accessed June 17, 2018, https://www.improbable.co.uk/portfolios/70-hill-lane/.65 Elise Vigneron, ŇANYWHERE,Ó ThŽ‰tre de l"Entrouvert, 2016, accessed Oct 7, 2018, https://lentrouvert.com/en/anywhere/.66 Tillis, Toward an Aesthetics of the Puppet,767 Ingold, ŇIn the Gathering Shadows of Material ThingsÓ,18.68 Katherine Withy, Heidegger on Being Uncanny (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2015).69 Tillis, Toward an Aesthetics of the Puppet,18970 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,32271 Jones, ŇPuppetry, Authorship, and the UR-Narrative.Ó,6672 Jones, ŇPuppetry, Authorship, and the UR-Narrative.Ó,6673 Margolies, ŇReturn to the Mound: Animating Infinite Potential in Clay, Food, and CompostÓ,327.74 Jones, ŇPuppetry, Authorship, and the UR-Narrative.Ó,61.75 Bergstrom et al., ŇBecoming Materials.Ó76 Nimkulrat, ŇVoice of Material in Transforming Meaning of ArtefactsÓ77 Elvin Karana et al., ŇWhen the Material Grows: A Case Study on Designing (with) Mycelium-Based Materials,Ó International Journal of Dsign 12 (2018): 119Đ36, http://ijdesign.org/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/2918/823.78 Igoe, ŇChange Matters.Ó79 Igoe, ŇChange Matters.Ó80 Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ Textiles.Ó81 Karana et al., ŇAlive. Active. Adaptive.Ó,201982 Tim Ingold, ŇThe Textility of Making,Ó Cambridge Journal of Economics 34, no. 1 (2009),10083 Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive Interface.Ó,210.84 Collet, ŇGrow-Made" Textiles.Ó85 M. Lean,ĘĘMaterialising data experience through textile thinkingĘPhD thesis, Royal College of Art. 202086 Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive Interface.Ó,227.87 Collet, ŇGrow-Made" Textiles.Ó,26.88Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ TextilesÓ, 2589Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ Textiles.Ó, 31.90Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ Textiles.Ó, 3391 Collet, ŇGrow-MadeŐ Textiles.Ó,35.92 Ingold, ŇThe Textility of Making.Ó,9293 Astles, ŇAlternative Puppet "Bodies."Ó,6494 DeLanda, ŇMaterial Complexity.Ó,1995 Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive Interface.Ó,21096 Winters, ŇMaterial Robotics Shaping the Sensitive Interface.Ó,224------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The Uncanny Life of Colour Changing Material, Puppeting in a System of Smart Material Things2Sabrina Recoules Quang0RCA School of Design, Textile0