


RESEARCH OUTLINE 
APR Y2 / 20-05-2020 

UNCANNY EXPERIENCE OF COLOUR CHANGING CHARACTERS 
Literature Review 


Introduction
Is the area of interest explained? 
Does the author of the review explain their connection or experience with the area? 
Is the purpose of the review made evident to the reader? 
Is the method for selection of reviewed materials described?

If terminology or concepts are being introduced as part of the review, are these defined or clarified?
Is the organisation of the review made evident to the reader? 

Background
From my unique position as a puppeteer in the textile department of the RCA design school, I investigate the potential of smart textile materials from a puppetry perspective. 

The inquiry is grounded in my ongoing investigation, started four years ago at the University of Goldsmiths, about the ability of new technology for generating new insights in puppetry. The exploration began with the introduction of coding to control interactions with human users via digital interfaces. Then it went forward to produce digital interactions between physical artefacts embedded with sensors and manipulated via electronic circuits. On the positive side, the digital manipulation generated new spaces of wonder for the audience where networked puppet characters performed unknown narratives. On the other side, it opened questions about the ecological impact of using programming and electronics intensively. Do I need this amount of electronics? What about the waste of heat generated by the installations? How to minimise the amount of energy needed to perform the code? What about replacing electronic sensors with ‘responsive materials’? These questions inspired me to investigate further the potential of smart materials as a way to reduce the amount of electronics and intensive coding while creating interactive objects from a puppetry perspective. 
Purpose of the review 
The literature overview aims to situate the research context and selects its material to reflect the research focus on the challenges and opportunities of textile making for puppetry in a connected environment.
Firstly, the survey locates the puppetry perspective on objects and matter within phenomenology, new materialism and object-oriented ontology paradigms. Secondly, the literature outlines and contrasts the different aspects of ‘the Uncanny’ in philosophy, art, robotic, interaction design. Going forward, the overview analyses and contrasts the systemic approaches taken by new media scholars and interaction designers on computational things embedded with sentient material responding to a change in their environment by a change in their structure: the ‘responsive material’. 
Finally, the study reevaluates the specificities of responsive materials and how to translate them into puppetry. The review investigates their use by textile and interaction designers and the challenges and opportunities they imply when producing uncanny objects or experiences from a puppetry perspective. 
In summary, this chapter concludes with the provocations supported by this survey and how they point to the research questions and suggest the research methods and tools.



Puppetry perspective on objects and matter
Follow the matter( Barad, Bennet, Deleuze and Guattari, Margolies)

“Matter just is what it does or how it moves” ( Gamble, Hanan and Nail, 2019, p.123)

Puppet makers can be described as following a “craft-like approach to making art, which uses the properties of particular materials as a means for making form.” (Adamson, 63). 
Like traditional crafters such as weavers or carvers, puppet makers are driven by aesthetic considerations. Unlike traditional crafters, and much more like the craft technologists described by Buechley and Perner-Wilson (2012), they follow functional constraints, as they manipulate the abstract functional and mechanical properties of the material they use in their making. Additionally, puppet makers are also artisans in the sense that to “follow the flow of matter is to itinerate, to ambulate. It is intuition in action.” (Deleuze and Guattari, 409).

Furthermore, puppet makers have in common with digital media technologists, the quest for animacy and life expression in their productions. Both of them use what Chow and Harrell (2012) call “material-based imagination”.  Puppet makers design their puppets to achieve certain forms of expressiveness. More precisely, they focus on the movements required by the puppet to perform both life and character (Jones, 61). While interactive technologists deal with the user actions and tacit knowledge (Chow and Harrell, 2012), puppet makers engage also with the puppeteer ’s manipulations and the imagination of the audience in relation to the puppet-object performed by the puppeteer.

On the other hand, puppetry makers as opposed to digital designers consider tangibility as a necessary component of the definition of materiality (Leonardi, 2010). As crafters, puppet makers rely on their ability to see what the material can do and to discern a life in it, which makes them collaborate productively with the material (Bennet, 2010). In that process, they explore the material qualities, and manipulate their physical properties (Margolies, 325), in order to reveal their potential for movement or metaphorical deployment. 
“ I’m looking for my connection with the material and for something that can express the quality of the piece I’m working on. Once I’ve found that, I can do anything. Every character carries with them a particular material quality-lace, satin, cotton.”(Howard , 44). In other words, they investigate “something that may come from within the materials, a form that we tease out of those materials as we allow them to have their say in the structures we create.”(DeLanda, 2004).

Overall, the puppet maker’s practice is an assemblage of material intuition (Ingold, 2009), exploitation of abstract functional or properties of materials (Buechley and Perner-Wilson, 2012) and traditional aesthetic.

The puppet system (Barad, Mejias, Morton, Pask, Tillis )

It is important to note that puppetry is an open system relying not only on the translation of the audience of the puppet’s causality (Morton, 83) but also on the control from the puppeteer: “With puppets of all kinds, even those with a limited range of possible movements-the nature and duration of each movement is open to the control of the operator,”(Tillis, 193). Furthermore puppets are constituted as“ signs of design, of movement, and speech.” (Tillis,7) and their purpose is to interpret “written text or directorial vision”(Jones, 61). 
When reading puppetry as a signs system (Jurkowski, 2012, pp 46-7) and how the puppet “statement” (Bass, 2014, p. 55), the story encoded in the puppet is transmitted through visual and auditory channels, one could pursue the analogy with the first order of cybernetics, explore the feedback loop and the effects of noise in the puppet live performance. By the same token, how the audience decodes the puppet message can be explored based on the second-order Cybernetics concerns with cognition as demonstrated by Gordon Pask ’s conversation systems (1975).

In summary, one can suggest that in puppetry, the story is encoded in the puppet, decoded by the puppeteer and translated by the audience.  
meet the puppet
Sean Myatt describes the first meeting of the puppet and its puppeteer as an exploration of the puppet’s “potential in the development of a narrative through movement and characterisation” (Margolies, 34). As the puppeteer discovers the puppet-object and learns “to adapt to the puppet, discovering how it moves, giving it needs, becoming sensitive to when to let things evolve and when to give the next impulse.” (Rene Baker in Margolies,52).  Additionally the ability of the puppeteer to enter into a dialogue with the object he is manipulating will reveal the liveness of the puppet (Posner, 6). In other words, the “puppet-manipulator” and the “puppet-actor” both engage in a devising process with the aim of creating a theatrical performance. 
The puppet suggests “a world that could be other than ours”( Bass, 2014). The uncanny character of the puppet (Bell) enfolds as the performer manipulates their opalescence (Jurkowski).

performing character
During the performance, the puppeteer relies on the embodied cognition initiated by the aesthetic of the puppet, the physical impulse he will receive as “the body knows things about which the mind is ignorant“ (Lecoq, 2008). As opposed to robots and animatronics which are looking at reproducing natural and anthropomorphic aesthetics and behaviours, puppetry is focusing on the nature of the movements emerging from the material and the structure of the performing object.
On stage, the audience experiments the ambiguous co-presence of the puppets and puppeteer as they “appear more or less immediately as Others depending on their design and the quality of their manipulation but also in relation to the affective response of the audience” (Piris, 40). Furthermore, puppet ’s performances are situated in the uncanny as the audience perceives simultaneously the puppet object as dead and alive (Gross, 2011).

The puppeteer devises the story the puppet can tell as it is “ speaking volumes by its materials, by its role as part of a stage picture, by its relationship to objects, even by its physical limitations.” (Bass,  2014, p.55).
Furthermore, Barad’ agential realism theory supports the idea of the puppet’s character as the result of the intra-actions between performer and puppet : “Agency and vitality, rather, simply do not exist apart from particular intra-active performances. “(Gamble, Hanan and Nail, 2019, p.123)


     Solving the tensions
tension: challenge, opportunity (Descartes, Simondon, Bass)
dual cut ( Descartes) , need to erase tensions and "creative milieu"  (Simondon, 1980), can not act on tensions they are self generating and useful to generate innovation
Bass , dramaturgy
How the story is performed onstage relies on visual dramaturgy as we follow the puppet , from the moment it appears in front of us and we are looking at the puppet and its environment. This ”image contains materials, figures made from those materials, and a spatial relationship of those figures. Perhaps there is also a relationship between puppets and humans, an intersection of worlds. We look at the image. Where does it want to go?”( Bass, 56). Following Morton (2011:161), one can also observe that as the puppet is placed into suspenseful relationships with its operators and the audience, the puppet becomes present. 
Additionally, whether the puppeteers are visible or not, the audience is fully aware of their presence and their confrontations with the puppets. As a result, the audience “ feels the dramatic tension in this relationship.” (Bass ,56).


tension making ( Barad, Bass, Tillis)

Puppet making
Puppet-objects can be considered as ”life forms that function in both material and immaterial ways, making humans and objects co-creators with infinite capacities for performance” (Gillespie, 149). Although puppet-objects work by different rules of logic than their human manipulators, this create a potential for tension in the puppet-puppeteer assemblage, a constant oscillation between animate and inanimate matter. In return, this “opalescence of the puppet” (Jurkowski, 61:62) contributes to the liveliness of the object.

Puppet makers and directors work in symbioses with the puppeteer to generate the potential for this oscillation. While the puppet and the audience are waiting the physical impulse given by the puppeteer to the puppet, they are both in a state of suspension. The potential is then actualised by the manipulation of the puppet’ structure during the live performance.

Performer and puppet
“live performance of a tangible puppet- the direct confrontation between an audience and a "living" object-that is distinct from the particular pleasures of media puppets.”(Tillis, 193). Additionally, the liveness of the puppet benefit from the audience ’s will to “to scan for signs of life “ [as the audience] interprets the data in the movements and ‘sees’ a character."(Mottram, 2016).

The manipulators perform the puppet’s movements in sequences and create the physical tension that will make the audience believe that the puppet wants to go somewhere: “When a puppet “does not “want” to go anywhere, perhaps there is no tension in it to work with.  So we move something, create imbalance. Now where is it taking us? What inspired this image?” (Bass, 56).  Tension might occur between the character and its environment when “the milieu and the modes of behaviour may function in a correlative way or antagonistically.” (Brehm, 88). “When movement fully dominates an object, we feel that the character is born and present on stage, when it is the nature of the object that dominates we still see the object. The object is still the object and the character at the same time” (Jurkowski, 54). The spectator experiences simultaneously, the conflict which unfolds between the puppet’s two aspects of “object” and “life”(Tillis, 1992, p.61). The viewer produces a narrative to solve these two ambivalences staged by the puppet and the performer. The puppet performance is, therefore, a succession of uncanny moments threaded by an overarched story. 

Overall, the puppeteer is the extended body of the puppet and so is the puppet to the puppeteer, their physical interaction and mutual embodiment will contribute to the physical dramaturgy of the puppet performance.

Matter and form
Considering the materiality of the analog artefacts, Bruno Latour (2005) notes: “materials have their own agency regardless of the maker. They behave in particular ways and hold an involuntary agency that escapes certain forms of control.” In other words, materials “have properties of their own and are not necessarily predisposed to fall into the shapes required of them” (Ingold, 93). By contrast, the materiality of formless material can be achieved in puppetry by the puppeteer who “evokes the unseen liveness of matter by making visible material qualities such as weight, acoustic potentials and elasticity.” (Margolies, 322). 
 
new sources of tension 
Puppeteers covered in sensors manipulate puppets remotely for animation and special-effects studios (Searls, 2015), digital artists use computer vision or machine learning in their performances (Salter, 2010), artificial intelligence robots engage their users at a phenomenological level (Hanson Robotics, 2018), and HCI designers explore interactive systems inspired by puppetry (Hui Liang , 2016). 

By contrast, as contemporary puppetry has morphed from puppet theatre to theatre of things (Sandweg, 2018) and even though, it addresses contemporary issues (Leeker and Bischof, Joss, 2018) about technology in the stories the “things” are telling us, puppeteers and puppet makers have, scarcely incorporated into their own practice, the language of smart material and hardly any computation tools.

Recent experiences of puppet making with technology for theatrical purpose (http://www.mattjacksonstudios.com) are closer to mechatronics and special effects as they are looking to build puppets embodying robot character on stage rather than using the specificity of technological material to devise new characters. Experimentations with puppet-machines sharing the stage with dancers have also been done, but as “the program of movements, once laid down either electronically or mechanically, is invariable” and “their “movement possibilities are “closed””, these objects are closer to automata than puppets (Tillis, 1999).  Elements of surprise and dramatic tension are limited and so the liveness perceived by the audience. Moreover, the focus is more on the performance of the remote puppeteer than on the creative potential of the machines.

As traditional puppet theatre has morphed into theatre of things, puppets are ready made-objects and puppeteers and puppetry directors are using the object’s affordances to create stories. In other words, the puppeteers are “hacking” everyday objects to make them co-creators of their performance by exploring them and setting their curiosities into action (Busch, 2006). Therefore, traditional puppet makers have been translated to props designers and outcast from the life making assemblage of puppetry performances.

Moreover, new technology has introduced a debate between traditionalists for whom "Technology must not be used to create the puppetry”  and puppetry “performance must be at all times under the control of a live, human puppeteer, performing in what computer folks call "real time.” and modernists : “if the signification of life can be created by people, then the site of that signification is to be considered a puppet “ (Tillis, 185).
This incongruity takes its origin from how traditionally, puppet theatre practices are grounded in the puppetry makers ‘ability, skills and knowledge about the way the material “works”.  In other words, it seems that there is a lack of tools for contemporary puppet makers to engage  with smart materials and to create smart puppet-nodes to perform along with human and non-human actors on the ubicomp stage.


“Uncanny lives of the puppet”
The study concludes with the puppetry perspective of the uncanny from the dual nature of the puppet-objects (Bell, 2014;Gross, 2012;Jurkowski, 2014) to their dialogue with the audience. Although in robotics and AI, scientists and researchers are looking at reducing these differences while avoiding the uncanny valley (Mori, 2012), puppeteers are exploring the specific language of the puppet-object, and the uncanny life of the puppets (Gross, 2011) to tell stories.



In puppetry, the performer operates the puppet to materialise its dual nature to reveal its uncanniness. The uncanny is the essential material of a puppet performance and always present. The audience perceives the co-presence of the puppet and the performer (Piris, 2014, p.31) and the tension generated by their different nature (Bass, 2014, p.56).
"A specific intra-action enacts an "agential cut" (in contrast to the Cartesian cut—an inherent distinction—between subject and object), effecting a separation between "subject" and "object" within the phenomenon "(Barad, 2012a, p.77). This separation  shows similarities similar to the separation between inanimate and animated nature both within the puppet.

In summary  of the perspectives on object and matter
The manipulation of the puppet by the performer provides a first contradiction between the inanimate nature of the object and the animated character of the puppet. When the audience enters into the loop with the performer and the puppet, another contradiction takes place between the organic life of the puppeteer and the artificial life of the puppet.
Although in puppetry, the matter precedes in the puppet-object (Harman),  the matter cast in the puppet is still vibrant (Bennet). Puppetry is phenomenological  and relies on the double-vision of the audience who perceives simultaneously the object both dead and alive( Tillis, ). This first contradiction is reinforced by the presence of a live performer at the side of the puppet-object. A second contradiction is sourced by the vital presence of the matter inside the object (Margolies) and the intra-actions (Barad) between matter and form.



Uncanniness as a generative feature
From anxiety to wonder (Freud, Carter, Gross, Heidegger, Jentsch)
The concept of the "uncanny" has been for a long time associated with the art of puppetry.  In philosophy, Heidegger, Freud and Jentsch built their definitions of the "uncanny" based on their interpretation of a puppet show.
Through their encounter with "uncertain" objects (Jentsch, 1997) or confronting the repressed character of familiar entities (Freud, 1919), Heideggerian viewers (Withy, 2015) experience anxiety and "un-homely" feelings. 
While Heidegger suggests that "Angst…is a genuine way of latching into how things are - a special mode of access to the ontological", Freud and Jenscht recognise the uncanniness of the human being (Withy, 3). 
Heidegger suggests that the unknown generates anxiety and “ is a genuine way of latching into how things are-a special mode of access to the ontological” (Withy, 2015, p.3).  For Jentsch, the uncertainty of what the object generates uncomfortable feelings (Withy, 2015, p.23) while Freud situates them in the realisation of the co-existence of a repressed and an expressed system of belief in the same entity (Withy, 2015, p.9). According to the philosopher, a designer may then reliably manipulate this unsettling perception (Withy, 2015, p.15). For Withy (2015, p.235): “our uncanny essence is not merely characterised by theatricality; it is constituted theatrically. Uncanniness is play”. Consequently, feeling uncanny when looking at puppets may be grounded on their capacity to mirror our uncanny essence. 
Similarly, interactive designers may produce uncomfortable experiences to “allow products and systems to become psychological mirrors for people, allowing them to try on new identities or to question their values and activities. “(Gaver et al., 2003). 

uncanniness as a universal status)
Although not actively linking her work with Haraway or Barad, Jochum(2015, p.7) analyses the source of uncanniness in the uncertainty of “the line between observer and observed”.

Informed by post-human  (Barad, 2012, 2015; Haraway, 2015; Gamble et al., 2019; Mejias, 2013) and interaction design (Gaver et al., 2003) theories

Barad (2012, p.34) is calling to face “ our inhumanness, the inhuman that we are—that is, this infinite alterity in its material and lively indeterminacy that lives in, around, and through us—that will help us face the depths of what responsibility entails.” and Haraway (2015, p.159) to feel connected to non-human life forms.
Gamble and Hanan (2019, p.123)
“In sharp contrast with Bennett, then, Barad’s notion of matter’s vitality does not derive from alleged essential differences between life and death, but is what performatively engenders those differences.” 

uncanniness as a generative feature in robot design
Uncanny Valley
“Uncanny valley” is a term coined by Mori, Masahiro in scientific context. In important to note that, Mori was looking at producing a realistic robot-simulacra of a human and his challenge was to avoid rejection from the viewer.  Overall, in his study, Mori defines uncanniness as an error of judgment and a negative feeling, associated with fear and rejection as opposed to attraction and affinity and “probably a form of instinct that protects us from proximal, rather than distal, sources of danger. “(Mori,2012,100). The scientist recommends to avoid the uncanny valley by designing non humanoid robots with human likeness quality. Furthermore, Mori “appeals to movement, saying that when something is in motion, it heigntens the severity of the valley” (Withy, 2015, 13). In summary, Mori’s study locates the Uncanny at the boundaries of life and death where animacy and anthropomorphism amplify the adhesion or the rejection of the machines from the user.  As a result, research in robotic design and robotic art has been encapsulated in a two dimensional frame where motion and human-likeness determine the level of empathy felt by the viewer. And more importantly, although his recommendation is to avoid uncanniness, Mori’ s analysis suggests that uncanniness is a generative feature in robot design.
Robot art
By contrast to robots engineers who avoid the uncanny valley by design, robot artists explore the boundaries between life and death and “the disturbing ambiguities associated with the machine’s uncanny lack of credible agency.” (Demers, 2014, p.133). For Jochum (2015, p.7), uncanniness happens when the line between the observer and the observed are blurring. She finds the source of eeriness in the cognitive field (Glanville, 2002) and design mechanical behaviours for her robots.

Interestingly, Jochum(2014) and Glynn(2019) are both drawn by the world of wonder where the puppets live (Jochum,  2015,p.6; Glynn, 2019, p.164) and have explored the strategies of puppet makers. Glynn (2019, pp 156-159) explores the gaze as a perceptual cue while Jochum (2015) focus on how the robots move as they were sentients and aware of their environment and Demers (2014) stages duos between human and non-human performers. 

 Although the viewers of these artists installations may have contradictory feelings about the reality of what they see, they do not feel any uncertainty about the non-human nature of the machines. Ultimately, the performing robots engage their human audience at a playful level, teasing their curiosity. As the audience’s knowledge about interacting robots increases, behavioural machines lose their uncanniness. What was uncertain becomes common and more complexity is needed to maintain the ambiguity of the performing robots. Glynn (2019, p.243 ) address this challenge by embedding in his machines “[g]enerative motions based on code, [to]allow for a continuous responsiveness rather than a series of pre-choreographed performances.” 

uncanniness as a generative feature in computational art

In similar manner, new media artists investigate unpredictable connectivity (Rokeby, 1986) and computer vision in responsive installations (Rozin,1999) to engage with their audience.

uncanniness as a generative feature in textile design
Interaction designers are looking at engaging their end user with lively interactive artifacts through protocols of cognitive processes (Chow, 2018).
In the textile field, the practice examines dresses controlled by natural elements (Winters,2018; Bowker, 2013) and shape-changing textile artefacts controlled by the user movements (Fallah). 
On the other end, aiming at an alien contribution to an aesthetic pleasure and a playful experience, textile designers extend the bodies of their wearers with textiles reactive to their environment (Winters, 2018). The intelligent textiles feed the dress with data about the surroundings and contribute to the visual conversation between the wearer and the spectator (Bowker, 2013). Wearable interfaces emulate the emotional engagement of the wearer with its garment (CuteCircuit, 2017). Practically, the wearer animates the dress via sensors connected to a control system like the puppeteer controls the marionette via its strings connected to a puppet system. Interactive textile designers are focusing on engaging the viewers with the wearer rather than the dress. They invite the audience to experience aesthetic originality and visual pleasure rather than uncanniness. 
Although designers are generally focusing on producing empathy rather than discomfort or unfamiliarity, interactive designers may find ambiguity as a resource to engage, question and provoke their users (Gaver et al., 2003).



 Uncanny experiences in networked environments
a place where the tensions are resolved, momentarily (Simondon) creatively (Barad) in the mind of the audience (puppetry)
The network logic
New media theorist Ulisis Meijias describes a “space inhabited by multitudes that do not conform to the organising logic of the network”, where machines and human beings “do not work by the same rules of logic. As a result, we have species clash, for we are two different species, people and technology. » (Norman, 6).
augmented matter
A digital network can be defined as an “assemblage of human and technological actors (the nodes) linked together by social and physical ties (the links) that allow for the transfer of information among some or all of these actors” (Meijias, 37). Similarly, one could also consider the puppet and the puppeteer as an affect system “ a complex fusion or mixture of analog and digital communication systems” (Sunden, 2015).Furthermore, this definition could easily be extended to animals, bacteria or any other non-human live forms as demonstrated by Helen Pritchard in her artwork “Critter compiler” (2018).
While audiences develop new habits (Chun, 2016) and evolve along with their environment, academics and artists explore new methodologies for addressing the complexity of the Ubicomp. More particularly, Irene Mavrommati proposes a transdisciplinary design framework relying on Drossos et al. (2007)’s definition of artifacts in the Ubicomp (Ekman, 135:137) as  “Tangible objects that can express their properties digitally. Software applications running on computational devices are also considered to be artifacts. Artifacts can be simpler composite, from a single sensor to an augmented building, from tagged objects to systems and infrastructures elements.” In this augmented environment, Mavrommati argues that objects are given new affordances. 
distance and time
As a result, it can be argued that as the list of materials for puppeteers have been extended to technological and “intelligent” matters,  these materials open new spaces of improvisation where non-human collaborators not only have acquired agency but also creative autonomy. Moreover, in the ubiquitous computing, senses of distance and time are abolished as the actors are not necessarily physically neither at the same location nor at the same time. Here, the unity of the stage is exploded and new stories are about to enfold.
Thus the question remains yet open: what could be the strategies for revealing the conversations, the interactions and the stories potential of these augmented matters?


Systemic approaches on computational things
The literature outlines and contrasts the systemic approaches taken by new media scholars and interaction designers on computational things.
 Uncanny life in the digital ( Mejias, Gaver, Vallgarda)

From the perspective of the technology affordances (Gaver, 1991) digital artefacts liveness could be analysed in relation to their degree of interaction with the end user. Media theorists advocate tangibility of the codes (Soon, 2014) or softwares as they “emerged as a thing—as an iterable textual program—through a process of commercialisation and commodification." (Chun, 2011). Jussi Parikka investigates the materiality of data, exploring how it “feeds of the environment both through geology and the energy-demand.“(Parikka, 36).
Another approach to the liveness of digital artefacts would be to explore the autonomy and creative power of these agents. Computer generated interfaces can be programmed to have an autonomous behaviour, thus being perceived as “alive” as users bring the tacit knowledge to the interaction, turns computers from idiots savants into useful assistants” (May, 66).
In the process to incorporate contemporary issues about our relation to new technology and how it redefines our humanity in regard to the machines, puppet theatre has, indeed, evolved to a theatre of things which is “a theatre of discourse as an opportunity for testing theories and seeing performance as an epistemological apparatus” (Leeker, 34). 
Human-like robot designers (Hanson Robotics, 2019) are mainly looking at engaging the robots and their users by emulating emotions at the cognitive level following the second-order Cybernetics. From another point of view, interactive systems are grounded in the first-order Cybernetics’ central animating principle of feedback-control (Glynn, 2018). By contrast, puppets are not about reproducing human behaviours or competing with human intelligence. 

Embedding puppets with smart materials and using computational tools such as computer vision or machine learning to decode their content, can produce new meanings that are not accessible with other art forms.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 Uncanny systems (Meijias, Morton, Baudrillard, Bass, Pask)

In order to perform the life in the puppet, one can rely on different assemblages involving not only the puppet, the puppet maker and the puppeteer, but also the audience working as “An ensemble in which components have been correctly matched together [which] possesses properties that its components do not have” ( Delanda, 2016, 11).


 Systems of responsive materials (Bowker, Vallgarda, Winter )
responsive to change in the environment and connectable reversible transformation, programmable  support for new type of  interaction between elements of  the system

Responsive materials have demonstrated their potential for characterisation in dance (Castán and Suárez, 2017) or fashion (Winters, 2018). Textile designers (Tognazzi, Coleman) have developed wearable structures that not only give senses and extra-powers but also extra communication tools for humans through wearables. To a certain extent smart material could be seen as “organic creatures or economic agents, [is] capable of spontaneously generating order and actively organizing itself into new structures and forms.” (DeLanda, 2004). Furthermore, architects develop a soft approach and produce interactive knitted surfaces relying on digital design technologies and computational tools (Ramsgaard Thomsen, 2011). Overall domains who have connections with puppetry practice like dance, human computer interaction (Qamar, Groh, Holman, Roudaut, 2018) or robotics (Rossiter, 2017), have successfully integrated in their creative process the smart material as a tool and as a material. 


                                                 
Uncanny materials
Focusing on responsive materials the review investigates their use by textile designers and the challenges and opportunities they imply when producing uncanny objects or experiences from a puppetry perspective.

Temporal matter (Barad, Ferrell, Smith,Svankmajer,Vallgarda)
Invisible matter (Barad, Morton,Mejias, Jurkowski)
Thermo Colour changing material (Bowker, Vallgarda, Robertson, Winters)

Conclusion 

Does the author provide some summary and conclusion that pulls together their entire review?
Does the author identify the contribution made by their review efforts?
Does the author make suggestions for research that needs to be conducted.


From Literature to the Research questions (Barad, Bell, Mejias Simondon, Vallgarda)

Diagram:
Puppetry perspective 		Agential realism + Vitality+ Object => Tension => Uncanny <=Puppet system
Uncanny encounters 		creating and solving the tensions
Computational things system 		Uncanny + Responsive Material = Computational things system (new puppet system )
Uncanny Material 			Responsive Material + background  =>  Thermochromic material
				Uncanny + Thermochromic material system =  research questions

Puppetry perspective
Following the puppetry perspective on matter and objects and reading it through phenomenological, new materialism and object oriented ontology theories, the literature brings the focus on two types of conflicts in a puppet system; 
The transfer of vital energy and focus from the live performer to the dead object; although they are both on the same plane and the performer is manipulating the puppet, the audience is more drawn to the puppet than to the performer.
The intra-actions of matter and form in the puppet; the matter dictates what the form can do, the movements of the form act on the matter.
These conflicts produce creative tensions (Simondon) and characters coming into life when performing in front of an audience.

Uncanny encounters 
Reviewing ‘the Uncanny’ in art, philosophy, robotic and interaction design,  gives directions to develop the character of the puppets : anxiety, ambiguity, alien agency, repression, wonder. It also suggests to focus the research to uncanny experiences rather than uncanny objects

Computational thing systems 
Thirdly, from the review of the systemic approaches taken by new media scholars and interaction designers on computational things, the research identified new uncanny spaces in the networks of computational things, not yet explored by puppeteers. Furthermore, the literature suggests to use responsive materials in the production of computational puppet systems.        

Uncanny material for computational thing systems 

Reviewing the specificity of responsive materials and translating them into puppetry, suggests to focus on the capacity of thermochromic material to become invisible in time and in context. The analysis of the responses to thermochromic material from textile designers demonstrates the need to re-evaluate the relations between puppetry and textile for making textile puppets in a system of computational things.

Research questions and methods 

In summary, the literature shifts the research focus from textile material to thermochromic material and raises two open questions, firstly about the ontological nature of thermochromic textile objects in a system of computational things and secondly about the potential of uncanniness as a generative feature to design objects. The review recommends to use puppetry as a research method and to engage with Barad’s notion of diffraction to re-evaluate the relations between puppetry and textile.

Overall the material for the literature review is selected to reflect the research focus on the challenges and opportunities of textile making from  a puppetry perspective in a networked environment.
The tensions create narratives in the mind of the audience-observer.



Methods and Tools from the Literature (Barad, Margolies, Tillis)

Methodologies

The design of the research journey evolves along with the practice (Pineyro, 2019, p.50). The inquiry follows a diffractive methodology which “contests the notion that a researcher can be taught tools or techniques about a world which is independent of and at an ontological distance from the researcher“ (Murris & Bozalek, 2019, p.2). Nevertheless, the study is actively generating opportunities to keep the distance between the designer and the researcher. The two movements of acknowledging simultaneously the bounds between practice and theory and their differences generate tensions between the researcher and the designer and  produce  a “creative milieu” (Simondon, 1958) where are situated the researcher, the designer and the research. The environment of the researcher filled with uncertainty could be only resolved by the production of innovative solutions. Keeping the tensions alive by going back and forth between practice and theory feeds the journey of the research. The provocations collected through supervisions  internal  presentations  to the research communities


In that context, I engage with Karen Barad’s notion of diffraction and re-evaluate the relations between puppetry and textile and critically analyse how ‘diffractively making’ puppets through textile processes may open new insights. As a puppeteer in a school of textile design, I experiment with the textile material world to interlink the two fields of puppetry and smart textile with computation as a thread to produce new knowledge.
The research relies on textile and interaction design (Gaver,2003; Vallgarda) approaches interlinked with puppetry (Gross, 2011; Jurkowski, 2013; Tillis, 1992) through diffractive reading (Barad, 2014; Gamble, 2019; Haraway, 1992; Murris and Bozalek, 2019) and new media (Meijias, 2013).  I am drawing from new materialists (Bennet, 2010)  and phenomenologists (Merleau-Ponty, Simondon, 1980) theorists to understand how smart material can be used to create the “..moment when the object becomes the Other.., when the subject experiences the object as uncanny” (Bennet, 2010). 

Looking at incorporating the thermochromic material into puppetry making, the research uses the constant shift, the intra-actions(Barad, 2014) in their internal structure to give them the ability to reveal the invisible as puppets do in shadow theatre. 
In the framework of puppetry and from a phenomenological point of view, I investigate the shifting moment “when movement fully dominates an object” (Jurkowski, 54). I am looking to engage the thermochromic material artefacts as they relate with each other in their own non-human ways (Latour, 2005) and how, when thermochromy is embedded in a puppet, it brings an extra potential in terms of visual and physical dramaturgy into the puppet ’s play (Bass ,2015).  

As such, the research does not focus on a single moment of transformation or on developing a new theory about objects and things, and neither is the research purely about puppetry, even if, the qualities I am looking to explore in smart materials is heavily drawn from puppet theatre theories. Overall , the research is about a series of experimentations being “ at once description and invention. Its “truths” and claims on the world are judged by its effects: what it makes “with” and “through” its material agencies. Experimentation, like Rheinberger says, is a matter of setting up the experimental situation, the initial conditions that allow for multiple, unforeseen outcomes. » (Salter,14).


Methods                                                                                 

The research argues for a new term ‘diffractive making method’. In the actual context of the study, such a method is calling to make diffraction happen by making puppetry through textile and performing thermochromic textile puppets. 
The method followed by the practice led researcher is an assemblage of diffractive practice, generative (Philpott, 2007) and speculative design (Dunne, Raby, 2013). 

Finally the research proposes to review how animators have encapsulate this puppet perspective through stop motion films (Kentridge,2017; Quay Brothers, 1986; Svankmajer, 1988; Trnka, 1965)

￼ https://www.ted.com/talks/huang_yi_kuka_a_human_robot_dance_duet￼ “Mark Levenson, then Chair of the UNIMA-USA Citations Committee, devised criteria for entries in the new category, and confronted, along with other matters of eligibility, the vital question of what, in the context of "recorded media," constitutes a puppet” (Tillis, 1999)￼  ”The uncanny of the puppet is a source of a strange pleasure, both frightening and at the same time compelling in its playfulness.”￼ Time lapse￼ Decay stop motion￼ diffractive reading to see it￼ Hyper objects￼ assuming there is only one puppet and one performer, a puppet system is composed of the maker , the puppet, the performer and the  audiennce